Does anyone want to mess?
Do you guys thank you. Uh, yep.
But I'll have to wait to hit pass them back later. Yeah.
Alright. I bought some with me, but you,
They're loosened my pocket, so I
Don't want, pa do you want any masks?
Thank very much. All
one.
Complete enough.
Patience, warm thing. I'm gonna
bring a brief of pressure here.
Uh, well, good afternoon, minister and officials.
Welcome to the Social Service and Community Slick Committee.
Uh, we have you for, um, an hour today.
Um, so we have arts, cultural, heritage,
and also, uh, communications.
Um, and if you wish to make an open statement, um,
what we sort of plan to sort of do roughly half on arts,
cultural heritage, and then roughly half on media.
Uh, but it's, if you want to, um, rightly say both,
or we'll leave it for roughly half.
Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, um, uh, um,
well, look, I, I, I just, um, introduced the team.
Uh, we've got, got Mac here, uh,
and, uh, the broader arts culture and heritage
and media, uh, team.
I just wanna start by thanking them for their,
uh, work and their efforts.
Uh, and, um, uh, we here for the, uh,
I think it's worth acknowledging the passing of Morris G uh,
one of the most distinguished, uh, writers.
He, he was asked about
what advice he could give aspiring writers.
He would say, uh, quote, read a lot, write a lot,
keep on asking what happens next.
And, um, that's probably just as relevant
for you today and, uh, elsewhere.
So, um, anyway, uh, good
to think about him being very successful, uh, period.
In the broader arts, uh, context, um, Tina has been one
of the most successful New Zealand films of all time.
Uh, this year, over 5 million of the domestic box office to
t was watched by over 400,000 viewers, uh,
and had over 5,000, 500,000 streams on TV NZ.
Uh, another highlight, I think will be, uh, Fiona Parton
and, uh, um, carrying on our representation events
in Biennale in the next year.
Lot going on. Uh, look, we've got a, a sort of a,
a draft sort of strategy that's been out there, uh, amplify,
which, uh, we can talk a bit a bit about.
Um, uh, we've had the, uh, budget initiatives, uh,
particularly wanna highlight the extra resources going into
TV and, uh, um, New Zealand on air.
Uh, and, and, uh, in terms of, you know, the media, yes,
we can have a board discussion.
As everybody knows, there's a lot of, um,
change going on in the broad environment.
Um, uh, but with change comes opportunities.
So, uh, by way that, that's by way of introduction.
Happy to answer any questions on any topics. Excellent.
Thank you, minister. Um, Rachel,
Uh, thank you Chair. Uh,
KDA minister. We've got more
Queue up there. Is that,
Uh, nice to see you, uh, Mac.
Um, uh, thanks for your work.
Uh, can I, I've got a few lines of questioning just to, uh,
signal, and can I begin, uh,
with probably what's been in the news, uh,
over the last few days, which is around cuts
to funding, uh, for the ministry.
And, um, I, I am keen to engage
with you specifically around this.
Um, you are a historian yourself.
Um, so just noting that,
and, you know, telling the stories, uh,
of our nation are really important.
But there is a change proposal for MCH,
which would remove six of the 10 historians at the ministry.
Uh, this is work, um, that supports things like, uh, Tata,
uh, you know, the New Zealand encyclopedia, um, supports,
uh, phu, the National War Memorial, um, thorn raids,
um, significant amount of work.
And in the global context, it's so critical that
actually we ensure that the stories of are passed through
to future generations so we can learn from our history.
So how do you feel about the proposal, uh,
to cut roles at the ministry?
And are you going to intervene to stop that from happening?
Well, uh, I'll go back to the, um, uh, the,
the broad budget decision, which was made, uh, to find, uh,
savings, uh, overall in, um,
the Ministry of Culture and Heritage.
And, uh, I don't think I need to remind, uh,
this, uh, select committee.
And, uh, like all select committees, uh, we are a bud, uh,
a government that is still posting a
very, very significant deficit.
We inherited big deficits,
and we need to get a path back to, uh, surplus, uh,
because every year that we're in deficit, we're adding
to our national debt that's gone significantly, uh, up, um,
uh, from 2017 to to to now.
And so, uh, we've gotta make tough decisions.
And, uh, looking across the arts sector, uh, there's a lot
of pressure on spending.
Uh, and ultimately when it came to the crunch, I didn't, uh,
I wanted to, uh, maintain as much money that was going out,
uh, of the doors to the broader artistic community.
I could have, uh, um, uh, I could have made a, uh, um, uh,
made some savings out of, um, money being distributed
through Creative New Zealand or many other facets.
And, and we didn't want to do that.
Uh, but we did ask a, um, a tough question of our ministry,
how they can find some, uh, savings overall in terms
of the particulars of that.
Of course, then that, that is a matter
for the chief executive to work through.
And of course, though, as you say,
there are some suggestions, uh, open for consultation, uh,
that process has to happen.
And, um, you know, we'll see what flows out of that.
But, um, that, that is the broad context.
And yes, if I, I, I'd love, I'd love to be in, uh,
in the situation where I could come in as Minister of Arts,
and we had, uh, a surplus and I had lots of money,
and I could throw it around and, um, hire lots of people,
and that would be a wonderful thing.
But, um, that's not the situation we
find ourself in the country.
And so, uh, that's where it is.
But ultimately, minister budgets are about choices.
And, you know, government has previously chosen
to give tax cuts, which means that it's more difficult
to fund these kinds of programs.
Uh, so I mean, did you envisage these types of cuts,
particularly to the roles of, uh, historians at ministry?
And I do wanna ask you this
because, you know,
the ministry is responding in an operational way
to the fact that they have this money.
So I actually don't put the blame there. Sure.
I I'm asking you, how did you envisage this level
of cuts being proposed to critical, uh, historian roles?
It's critical. Part of what we do
as a nation is telling our stories. Yes.
Uh, look, I mean, ultimate, ultimately, um, uh, um,
as all ministers right across government, we are having
to put, uh, make some tough, uh, decisions
and put, uh, some, uh, big challenges in front of the CES
of entities to find the savings that we need, uh, in order
to, uh, contribute, uh, each, uh, area in its own way, uh,
to, uh, getting us back to surplus in terms of history,
of history, of course, very important, um,
and an understanding of it.
Um, uh, the,
the historians across the country are broad and wide.
We have a, you know, extremely large investment in tertiary
education, and lots of historians in that space, uh,
are very big investment and education,
and lots of, uh, story, uh, uh, investment there and,
and developing these things.
So, uh, and, and a very vibrant, um, community
of historians, um, partly in some ways, uh, funded through,
uh, um, elements of creative New Zealand and other parts.
So, um, I don't, I don't think, um,
history is gonna stop in this country
because, uh, we've had to make, uh, some savings in the, um,
in this particular department.
But like I say, uh, it's something that's open
for consultation at the moment,
and no final decisions have been made. Are
You not concerned, though, about the role that Tata plays?
And, I mean, I've got questions specifically
around tertiary education and the connection
to arts shortly, but you are not concerned around the role
that Tata plays in New Zealand
and that it's a critical toll?
Uh, yes, but, uh, uh, look, uh, it is a, I mean,
a flow out of the, um, you know, the, the, the many volumes
of the encyclopedia of, uh,
what New Zealand history I think it was
or, um, which I, I, I myself have read, and,
and, and some people do.
But of course, everybody will be able to find online now.
And, and, uh, this, uh, technology is changing, uh, very,
very dramatically in terms of our, uh, direct access to, um,
revolts of history in many respects.
And so, um, uh, you know, e each generation needs to sort
of take a look at how best to get
and ensure that that's available for the public.
Oh, thank You. Uh, just further
to the reduction in historians, um,
and I wanna focus in on the Dawn Raids digital storytelling
platform, which was a key outcome of, um,
the government's 2021 apology to the Pacific Communities.
And it's a project that's already cost almost $2 million.
So will that still be published in full,
or has it been di deprioritized as part
of the 8 million in operational efficiencies announced in
the budget in 25?
Well, uh, I, I, I might defer to,
to, to Matt into the details.
So, like I say, there's been a, a set of proposals set up,
but they're open for consultation at the moment.
The, um, form reads funding out of budget 22,
uh, came about when I was at the Ministry
for Pacific Peoples.
It's a partnership approach that we've taken
with the ministry for Pacific Peoples,
and the role that we play
as the Ministry for Culture and Heritage.
At our front, what we've done is look at building a
repository through a website, which is, um, included in the,
the Dawn raids element of history
and everything related to the Dawn raids.
That work has been completed within the ministry.
These are planned to consider whether there's a separate
website on the Dawn raid that will continue.
And that's part of the conversations
that we're having at this stage.
But from the ministry's perspective,
we're not decreasing our contribution
and our support in that space.
So, my understanding, thank you so much for that.
My understanding was that along with the website,
which at the moment is, um, a lot of work's being done,
so I'm not criticizing,
but there is a lot of other information
that I understand isn't on that website, not available.
And historians, you know, over the past few years,
have worked very hard to find this new information
that isn't publicly available at the moment.
So at the moment that there is no intention of that
information being put onto the website,
and can, can we, can we be sure that, that,
so you're saying it is completed, the,
and that's the tangible outcome
of the 1.97 million for the public?
That, that's correct. In terms of the website
that's been set up, um, that's already in play.
It has a lot of the history,
and I'm not, you would've seen what's in there.
And so the intent is that we'll continue that work.
So even with, even with the reduction, sorry. Thank you.
Um, I guess we just wanna really clarify
that the, the reduction in historians, the ones
who are working on all of these websites,
which my colleague has also spoken about, there's no plans
for those to be shut down, to be, to be, um,
you know, no longer available.
Um, the minister did say, you know, there's a changing scope
of AI and other access to information now.
So can we be sure that these really important, um,
historic websites that, that give so many people access
to our New Zealand history will remain. Oh, sorry.
I just have to ask everyone, just try
and find that question a bit more concise,
because we've got a lot of people who wanna
Questions. Thank you. I'll just respond
to this.
Um, we are working through, um,
through the consultation process,
there is work that is required.
Um, and because we are in a consultation phase, I don't want
to predetermine Sure.
Um, what you know here in this context. Okay.
Thank you. Any question, Maureen?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, minister, we've, we understand the, um,
you know, that everyone has had to tighten their belts,
including Radio New Zealand, um,
but one of the aspects of delivery for Radio New Zealand is
to maintain their equipment.
Oh, oh, sorry. Sorry, sorry, Maureen.
We, um, you probably missed this.
We're gonna do, um, that in the next half an hour slot,
just focus on art from Heritage for this.
Oh, okay. I've, I've got another sub, um,
primary question for that then.
Sure. Okay.
Um, minister, 93% of the funding
that goes out from this particular vote, um, it goes out
to other organizations.
So in terms of, um, measuring,
'cause I know the government is very keen on measuring
outcomes, how do you measure the value of that distribution
of funds in terms of the outcomes it delivers?
Well, it's a broad, deep, deep philosophical, uh,
question in terms of, uh, how do you measure the value of,
uh, the joy that, uh, music brings to our lives
and, uh, literature and so forth.
So, and when we look in terms of the amplify, uh, strategy,
I mean, one of the, you know, one of the key things
that we want to achieve is, is, um, great, uh, you continue
to increase the engagement, active engagement
of New Zealanders in the arts and the broad sense,
and, uh, new Zealanders as a whole, uh, are, are into, uh,
um, the arts and all its wide variety.
Um, and, uh, so that's one measure that we, so we want
to increase the engagement.
And so, you know, things like, uh, um, uh, a Martine
where you've got, you know, tens
and if not hundreds of thousands
of people actively engaging in the arts is very important.
And there's a wide range of that. So that's one measure.
I I think the other side of it is, is, um, you know,
growing the economic contribution
of the arts in the broader sense,
which is sometimes something that we don't emphasize,
but, uh, there is huge opportunity for, uh,
the creative sector more broadly to contribute
to the growth in our economy.
Uh, and, you know, we think, obviously
of the film industry being significant,
but, uh, uh, music literature, uh,
extending into the broader design, the areas of, uh, uh,
all areas that we can, um, uh, look to grow.
So, uh, we've got a growth target as part of that as well.
Uh, so, um, there, there's those sorts of elements, uh,
when it comes to, uh, things, uh, uh,
like Creative New Zealand, um, uh, I, I think there is also,
uh, you know, obviously an interest that, uh, to ensure
that the things that funding, uh, people do, uh, want to see
or watch or read or,
or listen to, I think that's, that's relevant,
uh, part of that as well.
Uh, and also that they maintain a broad community, uh,
or, uh, trust in, in their decision making.
And so that's a couple of the themes that I'm pushing
through, uh, in, um, in my letter of expectations to the,
to the boards of those entities.
And can I just clarify, Mr.
Chair, so does that mean that you are measuring
participation and engagement with those particular entities?
Yes, and so, I mean, an obvious thing, uh, uh, you know,
if you're thinking of KA Pappa, uh, the number of people
that come to, to take Pappa is pretty relevant,
highly relevant, um, uh,
and, uh, also, uh, uh, their ability to, um, uh,
raise revenue from that is, is equally relevant.
Uh, but, you know, we also want to see them being, uh,
leaders in their particular field.
Uh, so that's one example.
And if you think of the Symphony Orchestra,
there's another one, uh, uh,
and you think of Martine major funding,
uh, that's another one as well.
Thank you. I just wanna take, uh, supplementary on that,
actually, minister, uh, some of the things you said, just
in terms of this, um, amplify strategy, uh, just in terms of
measuring it in, in its regional impact, um,
because I, I know just, I know from my own electorate,
Queensland Lakes is the second most creative city in the,
in the country now,
Second, Second most creative city
in the country, um, which is,
Ah, Uh, this, this is,
this is an independent reports thing,
and I, I know we've got, you know, gore, Alexandra,
et cetera, et cetera, um, doing some great stuff.
So, so how is this strategy going to, um, well aim, aim?
What are the aim in the draft?
Yeah, so amplifying this? Yeah.
Yeah. Well, look, I, I mean, I, I, I think my hope is
that, um, uh, that each, uh, each region
and each sector can, um, consider this as part of,
uh, their overall remain.
And if you think of, um, uh, eea each regional area
as thinking about their broader creative offering, um, then,
you know, they may, they may, may choose to think, well,
you know, these are reasonable measures to work towards, uh,
which is to grow the engagement with the broader, uh, um,
um, uh, arts community,
and also look about how we can make an extra, you know,
extra few bucks out of it as well.
Um, and, uh, you know,
obviously very much linked with tourism.
Uh, um, you know, a lot of our tourists want
to engage in our cultural institutions,
and that's a big part of, um, uh, our story as well.
And I, and I, I just wanna ask you one more supple on
this, actually, just that point you've raised twice in,
in the last two questions just about the economic
contributions, because we, I think we're generally aware of
how important this is, reflecting ourselves back
to ourselves and to the rest of the world,
but it's the economic contribution,
I think it's more than $17 billion per annum, uh, which,
which makes it one of the actually biggest
contributors to GDP in the country.
So sort of any thoughts on how that can move the growth?
Well, well indeed, in the, you know, the three sort
of elements of growing that, uh, um, uh, first
and foremost, thinking about a pipeline of talent, um, uh,
and, you know, obviously starts with the education system,
but, uh, uh, develops through strong institutions.
Uh, secondly, thinking about, um, uh, the, the,
the very significant investment that we make on behalf
of all New Zealanders in the arts,
and ensuring that that money is purposefully leveraging, uh,
investment, uh, also from philanthropy, from, uh, commercial
and, uh, and other sources,
local government's, very significant.
And then finally, thinking about the
regulatory context as well.
'cause, um, you know, a lot of these, uh, a lot
of people are ultimately small businesses trying
to make a buck, uh, and it's fraud as well.
If you think of heritage, I mean, like,
the most important thing I can do for Heritage, uh, is, uh,
to work, uh, continue to work with, uh, minister Pink and,
and getting some, um, greater flexibility
and common sense back into earthquake
strengthening regulations, for example.
Uh, and so, uh, the regulatory context is very important.
I, I've got, I've got a number of supplementaries
to ask about amplifies specifically around your comments
around, um, education and developing a pipeline of talent.
Yes. Um, have you asked for advice on the impact of cuts
to creative and performing arts programs to, in order
to deliver government's amplify strategy?
Uh, well, we, we, we continue, I mean,
obviously we're continue continuing
to have conversations right across, um, uh, government about
how different elements of, of, of, uh,
the broader government agenda flow through to this.
And education, as you say, is a very important part.
Uh, and they've got, uh, all courses, you know,
immense challenges, uh, that they have.
And, you know, one of the old canards that you hear time
and time again is, uh, that is somehow,
if you focus on ensuring that, uh, children can read
and write and do maths, uh, somehow
that means you're not interested in the arts,
which is a, a nonsense.
Uh, they're getting those foundations in places first,
and then you can, uh, build on that.
And, and so they're not incompatible. Uh, and so, um, yeah,
So I wanna focus specifically in on tertiary education.
So, um, tomorrow it's quite likely that, um, uh, staff
and students at, uh, UCO and Palms
and North will be told that the music
and music technology programs will not be continuing.
Um, this is a group of people who actually came
to Parliament last year and performed as part
of the Speaker's concert series.
One of the concerns that I have is that the Minister for
Vocational Education made comment earlier this week
around staff student ratios.
Now, you and I are both pianists, so we both know that, uh,
you can't have a situation where people are learning piano
or voice or some of those other instruments other than in
a one-to-one environment.
Have you had conversations with Penny Simmons
around the need to continue investing in vocational
education for the arts?
Because your strategy says that that's important,
but the actions of your fellow ministers are acting
against your draft strategy?
Uh, well, no, uh, uh, yes, I have, I continue
to have conversations, uh, with, uh, minister Simmons and,
and, uh, other ministers.
And, uh, we all recognize that, um, you know, we,
we frankly left a, uh, a complete shambles, uh, in, um, uh,
in the tertiary education, uh, situation with know,
we we're, you know, literally millions, millions of dollars,
uh, were, uh, very poorly spent on, on,
on Mad restructurings and, um, uh,
and overwhelmingly large, um, um, management structure.
And, and so, um, yes, it's a, a real, real shame.
Uh, so much was done wrong there.
And, uh, Penny's doing a good job to put it back together.
And so every institution needs to, um, uh, you know, have a
economically sustainable, uh, set of offerings.
Uh, and so there'll always be arguments about, uh,
how many particular, uh, courses we have in particular areas
around the country, and they need
to stand on their own two feet. So
You support, uh, cuts
to performing arts programs across
New Zealand? No, because that is what is
Happening. Well, I,
I support, um, uh, ongoing efforts to get, um,
to return some economic sustainability
to the broader tertiary sector.
Uh, and every institution needs to decide for itself
how it's going to, uh, maintain its economic viability. So
If you cut those programs, we have
to move a point of order, point of order.
Um, we do have a, yes,
We, I we're allowed to have sustained questioning.
I'm chair this, you've had six questions
where you need to others awaiting.
Um, Laura, well, I wanna come back
To this, um, as soon as
we've had more government questions.
Thank you, minister. Not Pats I to see the committee.
Um, my question actually follows on from Joseph's question
around opportunity and investment,
and I'm just wondering, um, we had the Minister
of Foreign Affairs at my other committee yesterday,
and a, a question that was put to him was,
what is the perspective
of New Zealand from the rest of the world?
And he said, Lord of the Rings was
like, what he gets all the time.
So invest New Zealand. Do you have any work?
Does the ministry have any work planned, um,
around connecting the mahi
here in New Zealand with the money?
And how can we leverage this?
'cause it's a great opportunity, I think, um, for
that industry in order to create. Yeah.
Well, look, I mean, I think one of the, uh, uh, um, one
of the mind shifts we want to engineer over the next, uh,
few years is to, uh, broaden our offering.
And, uh, um, uh, you, you, you're right, um,
many institutions have been built up over a very long time,
um, with, with an obvious focus on, on, um, uh,
traditional industries, which are, continue
to be very important to the New Zealand economy
and agriculture and so forth.
And that's, uh, very important.
Uh, uh, the only point that we, we are making in
that strategy is emphasizing is that, uh, there's also a lot
of other opportunities in the broader creative sector.
And, and film is, is a classic, uh, in terms
of building our soft power as a nation and,
and reminding the rest of the world that we exist.
I mean, we're a long way from anywhere
and we've gotta get out there and, and hustle.
And so, um, that's very much part of, um, uh, part of it.
And so, you know, you will have seen, uh, the in involvement
and engagement of, uh, people from the, um, the,
the broader creative sector
and some of the, uh, trade missions that we've done.
We'll see more of that. Uh, and, um, uh, so, um,
and I continue to have lots of discussions with the, the,
the foreign minister and, and, and all my colleagues
because the, the, the, the broader crowd sector extends, uh,
right across, uh, but you know, everything we do.
Mm-hmm. Just a supplement on that minister just, uh,
reving to Lord of the Rings aspect.
I mean, I note the new multi-year appropriation
for the screen, um, uh, production rebate, uh,
which is fairly significant.
Just what, what is, what is the thinking behind that?
Well, um, I, I mean the, the, um, a lot
of it obviously rests within the economic development, uh,
portfolio, but, but, um, you know, some of it domestically,
uh, in this portfolio,
and, uh, you know, it's a difficult thing.
I mean, you know, the, you basically have a binary choice.
Uh, do we want the country to be, um,
in the international film industry or not?
And if you do, um, uh, then there is a sort of a,
a global sort of set of expectations around that.
And, uh, the reality is that New Zealand is, um,
has not from anything the government originally did.
It was, you know, the, the, the genius
of people like Peter Jackson, um, that
that built a got an industry going,
but now that it's going, um, uh,
there's a very good argument to keep it going.
And so that's the basis of that. Any question?
Thank you. Um,
and I have three concise supplementaries.
Okay. Thank you. Uh,
given the 8 million in operational efficiencies applied
across the ministry, can the minister confirm where the work
to uphold the ministry's Maori crown partnership commitments
under the treaty settlements,
including relationship agreements with iwi
and Hapu will be protected from the cuts?
And if so, why isn't that made explicitly clear invo?
Well, I, I, if, do you wanna refer to the proposals?
Well, the, the, we do outline in the change proposal,
and again, I'll be talking to things that I'm still working
through with my colleagues.
Um, so I'm, I'm reticent to, to respond,
but the commitment is that we'll continue
to honor our treaty settlement commitments, that,
that is still the undertaking of, uh, the ministry.
And it's my understanding, please correct me if I'm wrong,
but there has been a disestablishment of
that Maori crown relations team.
So can we, um, have assurance from the minister
and the team, um, that those responsibilities
for the 216 treaty settlements Yes.
Commitments will be upheld?
Yeah, well, I mean, it's my expectation of course, um,
that the, that the, the commitments are upheld, uh,
how the structures, uh, of the agency are designed
and whether you have a particular, uh, uh, particular group
or, or it is foundational to the core activities of much of
what the ministry does is, is
for the chief executive to arrange.
But that's our expectation of course, that, uh,
when commitments are made in
treaty settlements, that they'll be honored.
And whilst there's a disestablishment of that team,
it's still incumbent on every person within the agency
to be committed to the treaty settlement commitments.
Absolutely. So there's, are there specific work plans
or partnerships agreement that may be at risk as a result
of those operational efficiencies cuts?
Potentially, in terms of timing, it might not be as quick
as we have at the moment.
We have 68 agreements. Yeah.
Uh, and of the 68 agreements we have out of the 620 issues,
around 315 issues that we still have to resolve.
Mm-hmm. And that's pretty difficult when we've discussed
with Iwi, their focus, their focus for us is
to help them engage around TAMA within our Crown entities.
So we've been mainly focused on that as, as, as a team.
But like I said earlier, the commitment to, to TDT
and our 3D settlements from,
Thank you, um, from those changes, I just see that line
that, that 1 million for the AKA that was found on, um,
um, um, Chatham Islands.
And I was wondering how, uh, you're expecting to, uh,
use that and to preserve that talent
or when of their disestablishment of the teams
that would do that work
Whilst, sorry, whilst the team have been disestablished,
but the relationships and where they will fold, proposed
to fold into the ministry will continue
to have those connections.
And the work that we currently have will not diminish.
New question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My apologies for being late.
My party's a bit thin on the ground this week,
so we're, we are everywhere.
Um, but my question is around te knowing that it's the, um,
the largest Maori cultural event, uh, here in ROA
and such a successful, uh, Maori event, it is, um,
just wanting to know that it's growing
and with its growth, uh, there are some challenges
and one of those challenges being with, uh, is that this,
you know, it travels.
Yeah. The, the event travels around.
And so it, it's not really, it's struggling, I guess.
Uh, the challenges are that going to smaller, uh,
communities, it's hard to, um, you know, to uphold
all the people, all the logistics that goes with it.
So it's, it's looking like it has to go to bigger, um,
you know, uh, cities across the country to be able
to sustain some of this growth, you know, accommodation,
travel, all of that.
So, uh, is there any, um, new money, uh,
and the next budget to be able to help with this growth
and development of,
Uh, well, well, I mean, look, the re the reality is
that the, um, you know, by far
and away, the, the, the, the biggest
single investment in the arts
and broader sense for was, um, to commit, to continue to,
uh, fund, uh, to Mae around 19, uh,
million dollars annually.
Uh, previous government had funded it for a couple of years,
but it was one of the many fiscal cliffs, uh,
that we discovered, uh, on entering government,
that it wasn't, and it wasn't,
there wasn't money set aside for it in the future.
We decided do that for precisely the reasons that you,
you've said that, um, you know, if you want
to engage a large number of New Zealanders, uh, in, uh,
in artistic endeavors,
and, you know, I, uh, probably everybody here went to, um,
uh, Clen, uh, and Barki and,
and to, uh, enjoy the, you know, just feast of,
um, cultural activity.
Uh, and, you know, the combination of, of wta of, of, of,
uh, haka and, and dance and, and, you know, and, and,
and rhetoric, uh, is, is amazing.
So, um, in terms of extra, additional resources, um, um,
I think that's gonna be a struggle in our
current budgetary environment.
But we have, uh, continued to invest in, uh,
very significant amounts.
Uh, and, and that was announced at the last budget in terms
of, you know, and ultimately it is a, you know, it's a,
it's a, it's a choice for the organizers
of market in the sense of, uh, do they want to go bigger
and bigger and bigger, uh, and, and,
and not go to provincial centers or,
or whether they, you know, wanna go to provincial centers
and just recognize that you can't be quite as big.
Um, and, you know, that's a, a tension that many, uh,
organizers have to sort of face.
Um, and I'm very conscious that that's an issue
around Nelson, Roger.
Yes. Thank you. Um, uh, I've got a new topic,
and I've got one bit, but quite a few topics,
so I'll just have to follow up on written questions.
But, um, I wanna talk about the Ley
and, um, whether you stand by your comments
that the government isn't saying never to funding the Ley,
and I'll just add to that as how,
just because we've only got a minute.
How can you reconcile your comments
with Adrian ORs statement
that the trust does have a business case?
Was it presented to you and have you consulted
with the trust about, um, stopping for the Yeah,
Yeah. Yep. Uh, and
my simple, uh, answer is, uh, well, you know,
when when we've got something that's, uh, consented, uh,
and has a robust business case, um, uh,
then we will reconsider it.
And, um, we are, we are definitely not saying never, uh,
and, uh, when, when budget allows, um,
and when we've got a, a, a, a real tangible, um,
proposition in front of us, uh,
then government will reconsider it. I
Understand there has been a resource consent application,
There's been an application,
but it's not a, you know, hasn't
Have nothing had advice on whether the removal
of funding might actually have an impact on
the resource consent application.
No, I haven't had any advice on that.
Okay. Would you look at getting some, because Yes.
Very happy. Thank you. Brilliant.
We will now ask you to switch hats to media communications
and, uh, to written.
Thank you. First question. Thank you.
Um, here,
and, um, I, this is a new primary question with a number
of supplementaries I'm keen to work through.
Um, it's been over a year since you were made Minister
of Broadcasting, and almost a year since you issued
immediate release stating
that you were gonna take immediate action for the sector.
How slowly do you need to move before it's not immediate?
Well, I think you'll find, um, uh,
and thank you for that, um, uh, historical, uh, outlook.
Um, uh, we've made some good progress in some areas.
And, you know, we've done something that no
previous government's got round to doing in terms of dealing
with the, uh, uh, Sunday advertising issue, and that's
before the house and, uh, making good progress.
Uh, uh, yeah,
We are laughing too. Pardon?
We are laughing too.
I wasn't laughing. I was coughing.
Um, uh, and then, uh, then of course, course, we've got, uh,
we, we've made some, uh, changes around the, uh,
New Zealand on air approach, which, uh, has been helpful
to shorten Street in a number of things, uh, in terms
of dealing with the Fair digital marking bill, so, so,
so called, uh, that we inherited
from the previous government.
Uh, yes, we haven't progressed that, uh, yet.
And, and I think any, uh,
fair minded New Zealander looking at, um, uh,
the global challenges that we have, uh, would recognize
that a a bit of discretion
and, uh, caution on
that front is warranted. Uh, and then, um,
You could have moved well before global situation changed,
though that Bill was ready to go. No,
No. You've
Been the minister for a year.
You had a number of months. I'd like to hear his answer.
Yeah. Anyway, so we, we, we've done that.
And, and look, I think that, I mean, the most,
OO obviously the most important thing we can do, uh, uh,
fundamentally for the media is to get, um, uh,
to restore a, a dynamic economi
where people are buying advertising
and which is the, you know, the real driver of how much
of the revenues of the sectors.
Uh, and so what we've seen has been a sort of a double,
a double whammy of, uh, the pressure of, uh, um, you know,
a change in behavior and, and,
and, um, uh, uh, patterns of behavior, uh, for consumers.
And, you know, we can all see how we get our information
and use and entertainment differently, uh, combined
with a cyclical downturn in the economy.
And so we're doing everything we can get that right.
And of course, one thing we won't be doing is,
is wasting another $20 million on a failed merger, uh,
between r and Z and 10 million Z that went nowhere.
And so, you know, yes, we've got a bit of ground to cover,
uh, but we're doing our best.
So since you became minister,
and we've, we've acknowledged how long you've been minister
for, there have literally been hundreds
of job losses across the media sector.
Can you tell me how many people in the media sector have
lost their jobs on your watch?
Well, I mean, the, the, I mean, that is a kind
of ridiculous notion is if the, the minister, uh,
of media is somehow, uh, directly responsible for, uh, a, a,
a chunk of the economy,
which is based on a whole bunch of other things. And so,
Approximate number, Well, there's been, um,
there's been a lot of job losses, particularly in tv NZ,
and I haven't gonna have the number in
front of you right now.
Uh, we can give you to it if you, if you want.
And it has been challenging time, of course,
it's been a very difficult time, uh, with the closure
of News Hub and, uh, presses right across the board.
And I think that's well, uh,
acknowledged and well established.
I would note that in, you know, in the recent weeks,
we've seen, uh, some investment in, uh, one major entity,
um, and stuff, which is, um, um, you know, which is good.
Uh, and it shows that people are continuing
to invest in the, in the New Zealand media.
Uh, and we see changes on, on public sec, uh, on boards.
And so there's lots of activity there.
And I think there's no question
that people in New Zealand are Hungary, uh, for news.
There is an appetite for news, uh,
and, uh, local entertainment.
Uh, the challenge that all those businesses are facing is,
uh, how to make that economically sustainable.
Uh, that is a challenge. Uh,
but, um, we're doing what we can to help. But
You're not able to put a number on it.
I don't have the exact number. No.
So, so what's stopping you from taking more action?
Like, what are you actually scared of? Is it, is it Nicola?
Is it apt? Is it New Zealand first?
Is it meta? Is it going on, going to order?
This is just social media
Eclipse and ridiculous.
These are serious questions about a sector act in crisis.
And the ministers in, I, I will,
I will address this. Uh,
the, the minister is not responsible for other political
Parties. You're not scared. Anyway,
so,
what was the question again? I forgot.
Well, I'll, I'm happy to ask the question again.
My question is, what's stopping you from doing more?
What are you scared of?
I'm not scared of anything.
Uh, uh, we, what we're doing is we're working, uh, way
through, uh, issues which are complex
and a careful and considered way.
And we have a media reform package that we put out there,
some draft ideas, uh, which we're making, uh,
decisions around at the moment.
Um, uh, again, things that were not dealt with
by previous administration, such as, um, uh, you know, um,
ensuring that new smart TVs
and things have, uh, local apps, uh, prominent displayed,
uh, such as, um, how are we gonna deal with the, you know,
the historical structure of, uh, uh,
the film commission in New Zealand on air, which was sort
of built in a, an era where there was a sharp distinction
between TV and film,
and, uh, in an area where that's merging.
So we're, we're getting on with the issues. Um, and, uh, you
Know, so fi find up on this primary, at the end
of this first year, when you look back on your time as,
as minister of broadcasting, are you proud of the fact
that the only piece of legislation you've got across the
line or, or into play is a change to allow Sunday
advertising on linear television?
Well, I'd say it'd be a lot better than what,
uh, uh, half a dozen.
Um, uh, but, but we looking forward in these.
And so, uh, yes, yes. Look, we're making good progress.
Good Supplement, supplementary on this Minister.
There's obviously a, a significant changing environment
globally around the news ecosystem.
And, um, there seems to be some,
some may think the minister needs to, um, step in
for all private organizations that deliver new services.
Do you think that's a realistic proposition?
Well, I mean, I think OO obviously an important starting
point for us is to ensure that, um, that, you know,
the two state owned, um, um,
media entities are well run and well governed.
So we've got, uh, radio New Zealand and, uh, tv, NZ TV NZ.
Uh, and, and like I say, both of them were, uh, I think, um,
struggled under the, you know, couple of years
of proposed merger, which didn't go anywhere.
Uh, TV NZ has, has had a big job to get itself back into,
um, uh, uh, economic sustainability.
Still more work to be done there,
but they're continuing to invest, uh,
and to improve their digital platform.
Uh, and, um, my, my primary leavers, there are, uh,
appointments to the board
and also to, you know, make clear what we're trying
to achieve, uh, through our ownership of TV NZ, uh,
which is, you know, good strong growing audiences
and high levels of trust.
Uh, there's a big challenge. Um,
and Radio New Zealand, uh, similarly, uh, want
to improve their levels of trust.
And also, um, uh, there's been a concerning drop in, uh,
in live radio audiences.
They've done a very good job at
expanding their digital reach.
Uh, but live audiences have fallen away.
So as a minister, um, you know, quite rightly,
if it focuses on those two entities, uh,
and, uh, um, I'd like to say that we, you know,
we're making good progress now.
Our incentive course has had to, um, uh, deal with a, uh,
reduction in its funding this year.
Um, and that that's come
after very significant increases in its funding
in previous budgets.
And, uh, we've got every confidence that they can continue
to go do a good job with the funding available.
Supplementary Laura?
Yeah, just set something onto that.
Um, there's studies that came outta the US yesterday,
and I know here in New Zealand as well,
that most news is now being consumed on things like social
media, for example.
Um, where do you see the ultimate role of the state owning
a its own news agency, whether that's tv, whether
that's radio, and do you think that part of
that trust is eroded by the state, having some sort
of share or stake in this?
Uh, look, look, I, I, well, I think there's no question
that, um, uh, a measure of trust was lost
during the COVID era.
Uh, and, um, uh,
and, you know, frankly, the,
that the Public Interest Journalism Fund, which, uh,
did backfire in that sense.
Uh, and so that is an issue.
Um, and there, there has, you know, evidently been a, a a,
a falling off in trust.
Now that's not just unique to media, of course
that has happened to a lot of institutions,
but it's, it's my expectation, particularly
that the state owned entities, uh,
will have a real focus on, in, um, uh, on turning that
around and bringing it back.
And it's why it's important that they have clear, um,
clear targets for, for both those entities
to make a difference
and then have a clearly understood plan, uh, for
how they're gonna rebuild that trust, uh, um,
and so that people are confident in them.
And so that's very big part of my focus.
Thank you. Uh, so what was the advice that was, um,
used in regards to the, the substantial drop
for the, um, RNZ?
It was, I think, 18.4 million over four years.
And were the, in that advice, was there any, um, sort of,
uh, yeah, advice around what those impacts would be
and sort of what services would be affected at RNZ?
Um, well look a, a again, um, the starting proposition was
that, um, like every minister right across the government,
uh, we have to find savings, uh,
because as I said at the start, uh,
we're running massive deficits.
Uh, we've increased our debt and we've gotta sort it out.
Uh, and so every, uh, minister, uh, is having
to look hard at everything that they do.
Uh, and so when I looked, um, in the media space, uh, in,
in the art space, so I didn't want
to stop money going out the door to people who are sort
of working, you know, in their, um, uh, um, music studios
and in their, um, um, artistic drawing rooms and so forth.
We didn't wanna stop that flow of money.
And that's why we've really put some, um, some hard, uh,
work on, on the ministry
to find some savings, uh, internally.
Uh, when it came to the media side, uh, yes, I had a choice.
I could, uh, I could cut New Zealand on, uh,
I could find savings through New Zealand on airs funding.
And I didn't wanna do that, 'cause
that's money going out the door, uh, to people.
And so, uh, r uh,
and I looked, well, who'd, who'd,
who'd had big increases in funding over the past few years.
Uh, a lot of areas across the, the, the arts
and media space have had rather static funding over,
over a long period of time.
Uh, but r and Z stood out.
And so we thought that they, uh,
they could make some savings,
and I think they can supplementary Tanya,
Actually, I think, excuse me.
Laura's covered it. I was going
to talk about public trust and Yes.
Well, what are your expectations?
What can you realistically do
to increase the public trust? Well,
I, I, look, I just, I just, You know, decline
for a few years now, so,
Yeah. And, and, and, and
so my, my expectation is that the, uh,
you know, as a minister, my leavers are in the appointment
of, of the boards, uh,
and on my, uh, my sort of statements of expectations to the,
those boards, uh,
and my expectations are often is
that they'll be waking up every day worrying about
that problem and,
and looking for answers to how do they turn that around
and start to rebuild trust in audiences, uh,
and, uh, so that audiences are, um, are not, uh,
actively avoiding the news like many people are, uh,
and that, that they're turning to both RNZ and TV
and Z as places that they can trust.
So, um, that, that's the sort of mechanism, uh,
and it's up to them to come up with a plan of how to do it.
Uh, and I don't pretend to sort of, um,
you know, have all the answers.
That's, that, that's the challenge for them. So mad.
So on, on that trust question, just to dig a bit more into
that, with the RNZ issue, you've, you've got a trust rating
for RNZ currently?
Mm-hmm. 55, something like that.
You've set a new target for them. Yes.
Can you tell me what the new target is? We, we
We're still sort of finalizing that, aren't we?
It's a, a, um, they, they came back with a, a, a target
that I thought was too modest. So would you
Be asking, you'll be asking them to go higher?
Yes. But with less money?
Uh, well, of course, uh,
it's not reliant on money, on dollars.
Um, uh, um, so,
So media outlets can perform better
with less funding, is what you're suggesting?
Well, I think you'll find that there's people doing
that every day in every industry across good
To have you on record Every day, every day.
Um, you know, half of the country wake up
and say, I've got less revenue,
but I've gotta do a better job for my customers.
And they work, work out how to do that.
And that's, uh, fundamentals of how you do things vo.
So have you given any, any specific,
you've given specific directives to RNZ
or you're going to give specific directives to r
and Z around levels of trust?
Yes. Have you given any specific directives or,
and do you intend to give any specific directives to RNZ
around multi content or levels of Maori content on RNZ?
Uh, uh, no.
Uh, but I, I expect them to follow their charter, uh,
which is outlaid in legislation that, that, that, that they,
um, recognize, um, the need, uh, uh, for all audiences,
including Maori, uh,
and they have a, a very considerable, uh, set of, um, uh,
programs in that area.
I also recognize that, um, the government of New Zealand,
on behalf of all New Zealanders also very significantly
invest directly in, uh, um, for Maori, uh,
and in other, uh, um, uh,
specific agencies also focused on that area as well.
And so right across the board, there are a number
of entities working on that, including r and c. But
You haven't given any specific directives for them
to change the way that they represent or,
or, uh, hold Maori content on their live radio or digital
Platforms? Well, my, my, my directives,
uh, to them are to make sure
that they, that they're just focusing on the things
that the legislation tells 'em to focus on.
Sure. And I sub
Supplementary card.
Oh, thank you. And so, um, just further to the, um,
the cuts to RNZ, we know that RNZ part
of the delivery is in those, um, times of national emergency
and making sure that
that information is getting out to the public.
We know in a couple of the last, um, emergencies
that was an issue.
So are, are you, um, confident that even with these, um,
cuts that they will be able to still be
that lifeline for the public? Uh,
Y yes. Uh,
the, the obviously, um, uh, radio New Zealand's, uh,
coverage through FM and AM and,
and, you know, increasingly, I mean, you know, a lot
of people only ever listen to them on their phone, uh,
through, um, through, uh, data.
Um, uh, they continue to be very important to that, uh, mix.
Uh, and you might be hinting at, you know,
that there's an issue around, um, a couple of AM towers in,
in Auckland, uh, and the future of that.
And, uh, there are proposals out there, which,
which would impact, um, some community, uh, radio stations.
And, you know, we are concerned about that.
We're interested in that. And so I'm,
I'm certainly in discussions with the, uh, uh, um, the, the,
the, the board of RNZ around how best to solve that
Supplementary approach.
I've just got stuff on that. And the Nelson one
that's being removed, the am asked Yes.
And Nelson,
Uh, so discussion that
if anybody's got more specific details on that.
Yeah,
I, I've got a supplementary, someone's broad trust, um,
uh, question just around, um, the, how informed of this,
well, these publicists, um, uh,
broadcasting organizations are for regional New Zealand,
showing actually the, the voice and
and matters of interest to regional New Zealand are,
are reflected, uh, back to regional New Zealand.
Um, how, how do you see that, um, uh, working,
working out in the future?
Well, uh, well, you come from the regions, Mr. Chair.
Oh, I do. Are are you sort of saying that, uh, you, you,
you think there's a problem there,
or do you, do you think it's
Going well?
I, I certainly, um, hear from, uh, a number of constituents
who don't feel it's always, uh, aware
of things have made interest them
are well reflected back to them.
Uh, so it's, the question is how to get, ensure
that those stories are told. Well,
Look, I, I mean, I, I think you can, um, uh, uh, um,
there can be a 10 tendency to try
and sort of give instructions over make sure you
do this, that, and the other thing.
But I, I think the core sort of measure is, um, uh,
that those, those two measurements around, um,
audience growth, uh,
and you're not gonna grow your audiences if people think
you're, you know, that are,
that a particular station is not interested in them.
It's only interested in what happens
in Wellington or something like that.
And so, uh, that, that, that is pretty fundamental.
And, and then also trust is
pretty fundamental in that sense.
If, if, if people don't feel like, uh,
they're getting the full story, uh, then that,
that flows into that measures,
that's why I think they're both very
important and they're not easy.
And, and you know, I I, I think, um,
every institution including this institution, um,
all of us are, are facing a reduction
in, in levels of trust.
And so, um, know each of us in know our own way,
uh, need to be thinking about that.
Um, I know these other supplementaries every we time will
come back to the topic, but, um,
we've been waiting morning's,
been waiting for a while for a new question.
We're still going six 40
Minutes. It's my,
um, it's my new old question. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, numbers
Way beyond that, Minister, minister, um,
radio New Zealand plays an important role in terms of
national emergencies, civil defense and emergency management
and broadcasting across the country.
Are you confident that the funding is
still adequate to maintain? We needed to do that,
Yes. No, I've been asked.
Yes. It's only been asked.
Yeah, we New primary,
Yes I am. And,
uh, um, we, we, uh, will continue to, um, have
that basic expectation of RZ.
Now, look, I, I would, I would note that, uh,
since 20 20 18, RN Z's, you know, head count
of staff has increased from 278 to 328.
Uh, so, you know, they've had a big increase.
Um, yes, we've asked 'em to find some savings, uh,
but they're still, uh, well ahead of
where they were back in 2018.
And, uh, so, you know, they were able to do it then.
And they can still do it now.
Thank you. Paying attention.
That's alright. New primary. Um, thank you chair.
Uh, why are you still requiring TVNZ
to return a dividend given challenges in
the media landscape fund?
Well, I've gotta cough now.
Um, look, there are
a state entity, uh,
and that's a basic expectation, uh, that,
that they should be able to return it dividend, they haven't
for a while, and we hope they will.
Uh, and it's a basic sort of measure of, uh, them,
them being able to demonstrate, uh,
that they're running an efficient
and economically sustainable business.
Uh, and so, um, I think that's a, um, a worthy goal
that they should be focused on.
There's been a, a, a large number of job losses.
There's been significant programming cuts.
There's some parallels here between the cultural value
that's returned to a nation through local content
where people can see their stories and hear their voices.
You've spoken to the value of that in your earlier answers,
specifically around the arts portfolio area.
What, what steps have you taken to support TV nz in the face
of these unprecedented challenges in the
year since you've been the minister?
Uh, well, um, uh, I say the two primary levers
that we have are, are around, um, uh, ensuring
that we've got a good quality board,
we've made some good appointments onto the board,
and there's more to come, uh,
and sending them a clear direction around
what we want 'em to achieve.
Uh, and, and ultimately, uh, why do we own TUNZ?
Well, um, uh, partly it's about ensuring
that we've got a good, uh, fourth estate, uh, in terms
of a journalistic, um, um, a good strong voice there, uh,
through broadcast television.
And, and, um, that's important also.
Yes, as you say, just wanna see some more
of their stories, uh, available.
There's, uh, it, it, it serves no great purpose.
Uh, if TV and z it's just, you know, another point
of delivery of, of, um, uh, global, uh, material.
'cause there's no inability of New Zealanders
to get access to that and they can.
Um, so, um, ultimately what, what we, um, expect them to do
as a commercial enterprise is to, to run sufficiently well,
uh, so that they have the funds
to properly invest in those first two things. But you're
Still requiring those funds to be
paid as a dividend. Some
Of them, uh, but some of them can be directed back in
developing, uh, concerts.
So, uh, that, that's something that has been able
to be achieved in the past.
Uh, and the real pressure is on doing
that in the current environment.
And so they have to be very, um, agile and dynamic.
Uh, now what we've seen over the past few years is
that the revenue had fallen away, but their expenses hadn't,
and they were running big losses.
And so we've had an adjustment, uh, to
that over the last little while.
And now they're, they're trying
to get themselves into a sustainable,
And I imagine as minister you're meeting with a number
of players in the media space frequently.
I imagine you're meeting with TV NZ frequently.
You're probably also meeting with Big Tech
and some of the large platforms.
Who are you meeting with more in the last year?
How many times have you met with TVNZ?
How many times have you met with Big Tech?
Well, I wouldn't, uh, I don't have the exact numbers,
but I'm pretty confident in saying that I would've met
with T-N-Z-A-A lot more
The supplementary on this minister.
The, um, going back to the sort of question I asked earlier,
is the shifting media landscape
where people are consuming their news and information
and, uh, I think from memory,
about a million people watch TV NZ News.
Yes. And over 4 million New Zealanders don't, uh,
so there's obviously alar a large number of New Zealanders
who are getting their information from other sources.
Is there any thinking about how to, um, expand the,
the, the market, so to speak?
Um, uh, I know this is most operations and primarily,
but any thinking on, on that?
Uh, well, look, uh, well, the only point is that, um,
you know, we're living in a period of, uh, immense, um,
uh, in innovation.
Uh, uh, you know, I've, I've got, you know,
young people in my family, uh,
and, uh, yes, they, that they get a lot of their information
through TikTok and so forth.
Uh, and, um, it's very different,
but they're still interested in what's going on in their,
in their community and in their country.
They just get it through a different way.
Uh, and that is, yeah, I mean, there's no denying that
that is creating real, um, eec um, sort
of business challenges for the developers of, of news.
And, and so, um, all
of these discussions are very important.
And if there were very simple solutions, uh,
to it all, uh, they would've been taken.
But, um, so that's what we're working our way
through. Right. Had a question,
I just had a setback on Rmz that I've had for a while.
And, uh, with the cuts to RNZ,
can you guarantee there'll be no cuts to,
Uh, well, I, I, I, look, I can't make, uh,
absolute guarantees because ultimately the board, um, uh,
is responsible for those, uh, decisions,
but it's certainly not my expectation.
Um, thank you. Um, the screen production rebate,
we've talked about that, and, and I know the international
one sits in a different path,
but the domestic screen production rebate, um,
you've had, you've, you've,
you've made some small changes to that.
Are you planning to do more work in that space?
Well, uh, there, there's a look.
The short answer is, um, uh, yes,
it should always be considering it, there is a tension
between, uh, basically to ask ourselves that there's a,
there's an uplift in terms of domestic, uh, contribution.
Uh, and, um,
and, you know, I think it's a legitimate thing
to regularly ask the question, are we, are we, um, um,
extracting the, the most value that we can out of that?
And what the design of it?
Um, but you've also gotta be in, be bearing in mind that,
you know, if you tinkle with it too much, um, then, uh,
that can be counterproductive and people might hesitate.
And so, uh, that, that's the tension.
But fundamentally, yes, you know, we should,
we should be asking ourselves regularly if we've got it,
have we got the, uh, settings, uh, at the optimum level
to get the best value for New Zealanders, uh, out of the,
uh, out of the contribution that we make.
Sure. And, and similarly regulating streamers something
that the industry's crying out for it, it put,
it should have an enormous impact.
It could be a source of revenue to come in to pay
for the production of local content.
What are you doing in that space?
Uh, well, that's, it, it it's part of the, um, uh, issues
that have been raised in the, um, in, in the media report
and, and, you know, with obvious, uh, broader, uh, context,
um, uh, to be considered, uh, and, um, uh,
and weighed up in that, uh, circumstance.
So that does, doesn't sound like immediate
action on streamers.
Uh, well, no, we, we we're, we're, we're working
through decisions and, uh, we'll,
when we've got something to announce on that we will,
Any idea of a timeframe on that?
Uh, well, um, soon. Uh, but I, I find
So, 'cause your definition of immediate,
it's quite different to mine.
So what's your definition of
Soon? I'm, I'm not
gonna be pinned down on an exact date.
So no commitment to doing anything
towards regulating extremists.
I, I wanna ask a Yes, a different supplementary question,
um, related to this, but, uh, just in terms of that,
that local, uh, screen production, you know, rebate, uh,
is there any, any work being done, um, to make more
Of it to Queenstown? Well,
Well, if I'm gonna say that Rockle Place to Die is,
is a local production film in Queensland,
which has done incredibly well in the Australian market
and the German market and the US market,
and is, uh, helping showcase their country to the world.
So when things like that bring in a, um, revenue locally,
but also I think brings, you know, bring credit exposure
to New Zealand apu, so to speak.
Oh. Uh, so I'm just interested in any work we've done to
leverage of that and the relationships we have
around the world, um, both in, in terms of funding these,
these programs, uh, co-funding these programs,
but also, uh, the value for tourism and,
and other sectors. Yeah.
Well, I, I, I, I think, you know, for, for all
of those reasons, uh, is why we continue
to invest very significantly in both domestic, um,
and international screen, uh, subsidies
and, um, that, that, that's important.
And, but, uh, you know, I, I would make the point that, um,
you know, the good news here is that, uh, the world is,
you know, the world is interested in New Zealand, um,
and in our culture, uh, and in, um, what we've got to offer.
And I think sometimes we underestimate
how interested they are.
Uh, and, um, so my, my only, my only sort of sort of message
to the broader sector is, you know,
just get out there and keep on hustling.
Uh, uh, sometimes I, I, you know, I think, um, uh,
there's a, a huge amount
of energy put into creating the product.
Um, but we've also gotta put as much energy
and creativity into, um, figuring out how to sell a product
and get it out there, uh,
and to get people engaging and enjoying it.
And, uh, so, uh, I think it's a very exciting time.
Uh, and um, yes, we've got lots of challenges and,
and, uh, the opposition members will no doubt point of many
of those challenges, and that's their job.
That's fine. But, uh, I back the, uh,
I back the media sector to do well
and to, to, to find a way through, uh,
what is in the meets the challenging environment.
Uh, and, uh, we're seeing that every day
and, um, you know, it's an exciting time.
Thank you. Um, the Deputy Prime Minister on morning report
on the 23rd of April said that given the line
of questioning, he would turn off the tag,
Or was he the Deputy Prime Minister at the, he was,
Which one you and two weeks later, two weeks later,
the budget came out and $16 million was cut from RZ.
So were there conversations between you
and the Deputy Prime Minister between
that interview and the budget?
Well, I can, uh, very confidently
and clearly say that the, the,
the cabinet decisions on the budget were
made well before that interview.
So there's no correlation between an interview
that the deputy Prime Minister wasn't happy with threat
that he made to turn
Off the tax. No, the decisions had
already been made at that point.
Sure. Okay. Alright. Thank you very much.
We've still got two minutes, haven't we?
Well, have you got another question? Okay.
Yeah, I, I've got another question.
Rachel's probably got another for.
Are you proud of what you've achieved as the minister
for broadcasting in the more than a year
since you've been minister? Uh, yes.
Yes. Um, it's one of many hardworking ministers, uh,
ministers in the government that's making
great progress for all New Zealanders.
Uh, have we solved every problem? No.
Uh, is, is it work in still,
is it still a work in progress in many areas?
Uh, absolutely. But, uh, we're, we're, um, uh, we're,
we're making good progress on a whole range of issues
and, um, uh, so there's a lot, there's a lot more to do. Do
You think the industry has confidence in you?
Uh, well, ultimately it's the people of New Zealand
that have to decide, um, whether they're,
they've got confidence in the government,
and I'm sure, uh, when we get a chance in 18 months,
they'll say yes, absolutely
Supplementary. Tanya,
would the budget documents have already been printed
in late April when Deputy
Prime Minister made that announcement? No.
Well, I dunno about the printing,
but we certainly made the decision day before,
So no. Alright,
well that, that, we've got one minute.
No, it doesn't, we don't have enough time.
We've got one minute. Thank you much.
It's got one minute with the minister for
one minute with the minister.
Can, does Melissa have one more minute?
I I I'm in the hands of the chair.
Yeah, we, we, we don't. 10 59. We have, we have seconds.
Let's just, let's just say we got shut
down even though we had more time.
Oh. That can be your narrative.
2 59.